All right. Hello everyone. Uh, let's
make sure this is all working. If you're
in the chat, say hello. This is a bit of
an experiment. I haven't done a live
stream in a very long time. So, I just
want to see make sure that this is
working. I can also check my own
um YouTube channel. It's a bit of a lag
probably.
So, I'll just have a look.
Yeah, I'm live. Okay, great. Hello
everyone. So, the plan for this is
basically just to do a quick roundup of
all of the science advances
in 2025 because there's a lot's happened
and um
it's a good way on New Year's Eve Eve to
take a retrospective and see what's
happened this year. And so I've put
together fairly quickly a list of of all
of the different sciences. So basically
I cheated. I went to this page here
which is amazing. It's um Wikipedia
every year
curates a list of all the science
advances of the year. It's a very long
list. Thing is this is all
chronological. So it goes by month. What
I've done is I've taken these, copied
pasted them into a document, and I'm
I've done it by subject matter and added
some images to it. So, we're going to
run through all of these pretty quickly.
I'm not going to be able to expand on
many of them unless um I've got
something to say. Some of them I don't
know enough about the science behind
them to really add any value. But I
think the value of this is just to go
through everything and just get a
snapshot of all the different advances
um that that that we've had this year.
So hello everyone. Oh yeah, I'm I'm
literally I'm I'm literally reading
Wikipedia [laughter] to you. So if you
don't want me to read Wikipedia or I
think your time would be spent just by
reading Wikipedia, I recommend you do
that, too. Uh
but this might be a nice way of like
hanging out and celebrating the science
of the year. Um
so also in these I've left in the
references so if you want to do more
further reading um these links here
which obviously you can't click on uh
they are but if you if you get the
number 27 that goes through so if you go
to this article you can click through
and then actually see the original
articles of any of this stuff as well.
So um that's the that's the that's the
my main source for all of this. Uh, I've
had a couple of others, but anyway,
let's crack on. So, the first thing I
want to talk about is this um asteroid
that issa detected. So, in the middle of
this GIF, you can probably just see it
there. And it started off that this was
going to have a probability of around 2%
of hitting the Earth in 2032.
So, we were pretty concerned about this
whole thing. They kept studying it.
Then, by the 24th of February, they
realized it wasn't going to hit the
Earth. Uh, it was It went down from
about 2% to a 0.0017%.
And so we don't have to explode it with
nuclear bombs, which is a bad idea
anyway because it turns a cannon into a
massive shotgun blast that's
radioactive. So um don't we don't don't
nuclear bomb an asteroid, guys. Okay,
next one. Um there was a microl lensing
event which was confirmed to be
associated with the highest velocity
exoplanet system detected to date. So an
exoplanet system this is a star with
planets around it that's moving
incredibly fast through our galaxy
uh
1.2
million miles hour and it's close to the
escape velocity for the Milky Way. And
the question is, why is it going so
fast?
Why is it going so fast? Um, so that's
an interesting question. We've had the
first 3D mapping of an exoplanet
atmosphere. So detecting exoplanets
themselves has been an impressive
achievement, but being able to map the
atmosphere is even more incredible.
Done by the very large telescope.
Um, physicists ever are very creative at
naming things and
it's got very powerful winds and
um, carrying elements like iron and
titanium, intricate weather patterns
across the atmosphere.
Sure, there's a way to nuke an asteroid
where everyone lives happily ever after.
Uh,
well, I don't I don't think so. Well,
what you can do actually is attach a
rocket to it, maybe a nuclear rocket.
Um, so as long as you nuke it sideways,
it's it's that's the way to do it.
NASA also announced the 6,000th
confirmed exoplanet. So, we're finding a
lot of exoplanets now. Now, we got the
technique down.
Saturn got 128 new moons.
So, it's now got 274 moons. Saturn, it's
got a lot of moons.
Will there be a video about this map?
No, this is it. This is it.
Hi, Maddie.
Hey, thanks very much for all the kind
comments.
What's next? Um, okay. So, three new
rocket exoplanets, all smaller than
Earth, have been detected around Barnard
Star, which is the closest solitary star
to our own sun, 5.96 light years away.
So, on this map, you can see Barnard
star
there.
Alpha Centuri is the closest, but it's I
think a tertiary system. I think there's
three orbiting stars. Um, there's
definitely two. I think there might be
three. Barnard star is only one star.
Um,
so if things go really badly
in this solar system, Barnard Star might
be a good candidate.
Maybe we could send Elon Musk to Barnard
Star.
The minor planet center announces
discovery of another trans neptunian
orbit or object sorry and the fourth
known sedoid. So a sedoid is
a object
which has got a very very eccentric
orbit and trans neptunia mean it's
beyond the orbit of Neptune. um before
they discovered three discovered a new
one. Pretty cool.
If you nuke an asteroid, will the pieces
of it just hit Earth? Yeah, exactly. So,
what happens if you nuke an asteroid is
you smash it into all the bits, but all
the bits stay in the same direction. So,
generally, if something's in an orbit,
it's got a lot of momentum to stay in
that orbit. The only way you can um
change that is by gradually shifting it
away from the orbit. So you could attach
a rocket or even paint it. You could
send someone to paint an asteroid and
then it would absorb
more of the sun's energy and and deflect
it. trouble with these ideas of um
attaching a rocket or painting an
asteroid is they're they're often
spinning. And so then that counteracts
any effect because if you just painted
one side of it, I guess you could paint
a whole asteroid, if it's if it's bright
white and you painted it black,
that would absorb more energy.
Oh, but if it's white, it reflects all
the energy. I don't know.
going to have to do some uh thinking
about that one. Generally, it's quite
hard to disrupt an asteroid.
Uh which is why we're so keen to
discover them before they hit Earth.
Um
okay, how do I how do I cancel people in
chat? [laughter]
So
uh the atmosphere of K218b
is a candidate waterwood located 124
light years away is found to contain
large quantities of dimethyl sulfide and
dimethyl dulfide.
Two compounds that on Earth are only
known to be produced by life. So this
discovery um is the strongest evidence
to date of biological activity beyond
the solar system. You might have
remembered this when it came out, but
that's very cool.
um it's not evidence that life exists,
but we don't know how these compounds
can be created if it's not life. So, um
that's very tantalizing.
Um we've got two additional moons to
Jupiter.
The James Web Space Telescope discovered
the most distant galaxy ever detected.
So, we've got a more distant galaxy.
This happens just about every year. We
discover a further galaxy. It's got a
red shift of 14.44. 44 placing its
formation within 280 million years of
the big bang. So the red shift is um the
light from distant galaxies gets
stretched in the space as it travels
towards us because all space is
expanding everywhere. Um
one second.
There we go.
Yeah, because the universe is expanding
in every direction.
Um,
light that travels so far from basically
the edge of the observable universe to
us has been stretched out a massive
amount for it to get here because uh and
red is called red shift because red is
um longer wavelength, blue is shorter
wavelengths.
Okay, what's next?
Um, we've got a new dwarf planet
candidate in the outer solar system. Um,
this one's actually fairly small though.
It's like 30 kilometers
uh
500 to 900 km. This is a small object
but another new dwarf planet. Uh we saw
the south pole of the sun by the solar
orbiter. Uh we've had the third ever
confirmed interstellar object pass into
our solar system.
Uh discovered by the terrestrial impact
at last alert system atlas. Um you can
see the trajectory of it through our
solar system there passed fairly close
um past Mars. So what makes a dwarf
planet versus a large asteroid? the
shape.
It's a great question.
I don't actually know the definition off
the top of my head. I'm not going to get
derailed by searching for it now. We we
could find it out pretty easily. But
yeah, it's a good question. asteroids.
Maybe it's something about
Yeah, probably is the size.
Um,
that [snorts] actually looks like a
comet. If you look at this image, the
way it's coming into the solar system
and back out again. So, what's the
difference between a comet and uh is a
comet an asteroid? I don't know. In the
end, these are just human words for
rocks that don't know any better.
We discovered a gammaray burst that
lasted for nearly an entire day. So
gammaray bursts come from
um when a star is next to a black hole
and the matter of the star falls into
the black hole. It speeds up to very
close to the speed of light. And as it
does that it emits a lot of energy.
That's what we think gammaray bursts
are. For a long time they were confusing
to us.
Do I have a map of astronomy? Yes, I do.
So, I just did well, I did a map of the
constellations and I've also got um a
map of every kind of thing in space
which lists all of the different objects
in space. Um map of astronomy.
Yeah, the map of the constellations, the
map of the night sky. So, my last video
that I released a couple of weeks ago
that covers that uh tells you you can
learn all the constellations, all 88
constellations. Excuse me while I just
have a drink.
Next in space, we've got um a new
spacecraft from NASA which can image the
Earth's surface down to a resolution of
10 mters using um using radar.
We've got a new moon of Uranus.
Uh the diameter of the new moon is uh 10
km.
Uranus is much bigger.
Scientists have found organic molecules
on Enceladus,
which is one of the moons of Saturn. And
we think Enceladus has got a liquid
ocean underneath
um an ice sheet that covers the entire
planet. And so it has these geysers,
geysers, geezers of gas. And so the
Cassini spacecraft
intercepted one of those
and analyzed what it's got in it. Found
organic molecules. Again, signs of the
building blocks of life. And also we got
this building blocks of life. Tryptophan
and amino acid were discovered uh in
this asteroid Bennu. I don't know if you
remember
in 2021
we landed I say we scientists landed a
spacecraft on Bennu first time we landed
on an asteroid and it took a sample
brought that sample back to earth and
they analyzed it and found an amino acid
which is a complicated biomolelecule
and so
uh this is a another indication that of
of of biological molecules in
uh in space and
it's there's this theory that life on
Earth was seeded from space and so this
is evidence to support that hypothesis.
Is this round up for astronomy only? No.
So uh in fact let me show you [snorts]
that's the end of the space section. Now
we've got physics, nuclear fusion,
quantum computing, material science,
engineering, 3D printing, chemistry,
weird stuff. Paleontology, anthropology,
biology, medicine, climate, environment,
AI, and maths. So, we'll see how much we
can get through. Uh, I'm going to have
to rattle through these because there's
an awful lot. So, let's go on to
physics. So, Italian researchers report
turning light into a super solid for the
first time.
So this is something I don't fully
understand. How light turns into a super
solid. Basically in condensed matter
physics I know what a super fluid is. If
you cool down liquid helium cool down
helium enough it forms a liquid with no
viscosity because it forms a special
quantum state called a Bose Einstein
condensate. So basically zero viscosity
means um if you imagine honey, honey
dribbles slowly. So, it's got a high
viscosity. A lower viscosity is water,
which dribbles quickly. And the the
thing that dribbles the fastest is
something with no viscosity. And so, you
can have liquid helium in um in a cup
and it will just flow out out up the
sides and out of a cup because it's got
such low viscosity that it surface
tension will just push it out of the
cup. Um Oh, thanks. Uh I'm always happy
to hear when my maps have been useful.
There's more many more to come. So
turning light into a super solid. So a
super solid would be same thing as a
super fluid. It's got zero viscosity
because of a quantum state. Uh I don't
know. Solid
the particles form rigid spatially
ordered structure but it's light. So how
can it be solid? I don't understand.
Um,
a cool result. Uh, research published by
two high schoolers proves that upstream
contamination is possible even without
the marang
marangoni effect. So the marangoni
effect is if you pour um pepper onto
water and then put in a bit of liquid
soap, the pepper because of the change
of the surface tension, the pepper moves
really quickly uh to the edges. Um so
this is a way that you could get
um
liquid flowing or particles in liquid
flowing against the flow of the the
liquid.
Um but two high schoolers found there's
another mechanism for that which is
cool. It's great when uh people in high
school
uh publish new science.
Very exciting. Uh physicists at MIT
capture the first images of individual
atoms interacting freely in space
showing behaviors previously only
predicted. [snorts] So more resolution
in
imaging atoms. And at the Alice
experiment at CERN, they managed to
convert lead into gold. So finally we
can do alchemy. What we've been wanting
to do for hundreds of years, they did at
Atlas. I was actually there around the
same time that they did that. I visited
CERN for a few days. It was fun. MIT
performed an idealized atomic scale
double slit experiment. So basically
they confirmed Neil Bore's
complimentarity principle and ruled out
Einstein's simultaneous aversion of wave
particle behavior. So this is like
foundations of quantum physics um
experimentally.
So
there
um are still many open questions in the
foundations of quantum mechanics
and I think a lot of the really cool
experimental advances are testing these
things. This is the area I was from. Um,
experimental quantum mechanics. Uh, so
it's cool when they I'm going to have to
read more into this actually because,
um, this is my bag.
Also at CERN, oops. Also at CERN, um, at
the Alpha experiment, they've got an
eight-fold increase in the rate of
production of antimatter using [snorts]
laser cooled burillium ions to
synthetically cool posetrons to minus
266° centigrade. allows over 15,000
antihydrogens to be created in under
seven hours. So I visited the alpha
experiment as well earlier this year and
um one of the big problems with the
production of antimatter is cooling
everything down because um all of the
antiparticles come from a beam line. So
they've got a particle accelerator where
they smash stuff together and that's how
they get out their antimatter. But then
cooling it down to mix it together is um
is very difficult. So they found a new
way of doing that with laser called
burillium ions. Um so
creating lots of antimatter which is
very handy to um to to have to
experimentally test
basically the fundamental nature of
antimatter.
Um,
yeah, there's some other cool stuff
which antimatter is going to have a big
year in 2026. I reckon
this is in notion. Did you manily know?
No. Um, this actually is just a Google
doc. Um, I wanted to do something a bit
more fancy in terms of like maybe a map
of all of this stuff, but the production
of that was way too much. Uh, the year
would have run out by the time I did all
of that. So, the easiest way I could do
that is in a Google doc. Um, basically
these are headings and I've put images
in. That's all. Very simple. Okay, let's
move on. Nuclear fusion. So, we want
nuclear fusion. It will sort out a lot
of the world's energy problems. It's not
here yet, but there are some cool
advances. Will I make more sessions like
this? I don't know. This is a bit more
of this is just an experiment to see
um what live streaming is like.
Potentially, I will do more of these. Uh
I think it's a cool way to do um science
news quickly quickly look at all the the
science
of today right [clears throat] nuclear
fusion uh the west tack in France has
got maintained a plasma for one
1,337
seconds
world record for nuclear fusion 25%
longer than similar effort by China the
previous month. So this has been an
iterative improvement of fusion reactors
over time. Um this is a cool image
actually. Can you see the person on the
on the right hand side? Gives you an
idea of the scale. I wasn't sure about
the scale of these things. Um that's a
cool image. So fusion's getting better.
Uh and
it complete the construction of the
world's largest most powerful pulseed
superconducting electromagnet system.
Oops, sorry.
Um,
making a major milestone on the path to
sustained nuclear fusion, the central
solenoid and surrounding magnets will
confine the plasma at 150 million
degrees centigrade, enabling it to
produce 500 megawatts of fusion power
from just 50 megawatts of input. That's
the dream.
Hey, thanks everyone. and thanks for
their feedback. Yeah, if you enjoy it,
I'll do more of these. Okay, moving on
to quantum computing. So, Fusion is
coming along. Great. Another technology
that's coming along, quantum computing.
So, two big um advances this year.
Microsoft re um released their Myana one
quantum computer.
Um I did a whole video about this which
you can find here. These are actually my
um here you go my images from when I
visited Microsoft. Uh that's me and the
chip and I explain my Arana particles
with Lego.
So um there's a there's a QR code if you
want to watch that. Do more of these. Be
like the fire ship of general news and
science premium companies. Hey, thanks
everyone. Uh appreciate it. Appreciate
the feedback.
Um, so what is topological quantum
computing?
Well, that's what Microsoft are putting
in their quantum computers. Um, they say
they're going to be able to solve
meaningful industrial scale problems. I
mean, that's what everyone who's making
a quantum computer is trying to make.
Microsoft claims that Myana 1 represents
progress in its long pro longunning
project to create a quantum computer
based on topological cubits. Yeah,
that's true. So this is basically the
first implementation of a topological
cubit um that they released and
f first of all it wasn't a technically a
cubit. It was a when I went and saw it
um
it was
not yet fully born cubit but they
actually have um they have reached the
level where it's a cubit. So I saw it
the year before. So my video is um
is actually was a bit early by a year.
Um
so then the the next challenge with
these topological cubits is to glue make
a bunch and glue them all together.
Going to find useful more likely.
No. So quantum computing I should say is
still years off. So, um, if you imagine
stepping stones, there's like six or
seven stepping stones to get to a
working useful quantum computer and
they're on about step three. So, they've
still got another four, three, four
steps to go before they've got a useful
quantum computer. And each one of those
steps is like a big engineering
challenge.
So um IBM said that they would be they
would have a machine capable of solving
real world world problems by 2030. But I
think that has now been pushed back to
2032.
So that's the kind of timelines that
these companies are saying. So if
they're saying 2032 now, it might be
like mid the 2030s.
Um but it just depends on the rate of
the engineering progress and
people were saying Microsoft were
had picked a very bad way of doing
quantum computing by trying to do
topological quantum computing.
Basically, it's a very difficult method
of um it was a theoretical,
highly theoretical
um quantum state that they were trying
to use to make their quantum computers
from that had never actually been made
physically. And so they put all of their
chips in that basket to be like, "Yeah,
we're going to do that." And um so lots
of people thought that's a bit of a
risk, but they managed to do it. So
there there's a lot of impressive
engineering in in the world of quantum
computing. Um another one is so
Microsoft are doing a quantum computer
also Amazon revealed they're doing a
quantum computer using [snorts] cat
cqits
um which reduce quantum computing errors
by up to 90% making error correction
more efficient and scalable. Basically
the big problem with quantum computing
is error correction. Um and so being
able to implement that well at scale is
one of these big stepping stones. That's
the next one that they're trying to
trying to get over now.
Okay. Now, on to material science.
uh in January, the first two-dimensional
mechanically interlocked materials
demonstrated by Northwestern University
consisting of 100 trillion bonds per
square cm, which its creators described
as having exceptional flexibility and
strength. Adding just 2.5% of the new
material to Ultum boosted the latter's
tensile modulus by 45%.
That's cool. New materials,
I'm here for it.
a new alotropic carbon known as cylo48
carbon was discovered.
So that's cool. So carbon, you've got
graphite, you've got diamond and you've
got um carbon nanot tubes
and you've got buckminster ferines.
And this is a new one, cylo 48 carbon.
It's got 48 carbon atoms in an
alternating single triple bond pattern
demonstrated by Oxford University's
Department of Chemistry. So, this should
be in chemistry, not material science,
but the two cross over a lot. Um, a new
bioplastic LHB is shown to biodegrade
under deep sea conditions, losing over
80% of its mass after 13 months at a
depth of 80 855 m. while conventional
um
polyactide based plastics remained
intact.
Oh, hey, I've had a donation. Thank you.
In and out. 333.
Um I'm very interested in doing a map of
philosophy. Yes,
I would like to do that uh this year.
So, thanks for the donation. $2 will go.
Get get me a coffee on my way to do a
map of philosophy. I've already written
an outline. Um but obviously philosophy
is a massive
a massive uh subject.
Okay, so that's material science. Let's
move on to engineering.
So um in 2016 uh sorry in the 16th of
April 2016 16th of April of this year
scientists report a new method of
generating electricity from falling rain
water using a plug flow in vertical
tubes which converts over 10% of the
water's energy into electricity and
producing enough power to light 12 LED
bulbs. I mean this is amazing. If we can
generate energy from falling rainwater
locally, that's a great thing to do. Um,
engineers at MIT developed a new f fuel
cell based on a reaction between sodium
metal and air with potentially three
times as much energy per pound as the
current best lithium ion batteries used
in EVs. I mean, new battery technology
is amazing.
So, sodium metal and air
That's potentially good because lithium
ion is becoming an expensive material. I
don't know if sodium is um is more
abundant
than lithium.
Anyway, new battery technology
potentially.
This is cool. Uh, the Korea Institute of
Machinery and Materials unveils a
hydrogen-powered plasma torch that can
break down mixed plastic waste in under
0.01 seconds, converting it into high
purity chemical feed stock such as
ethylene and benzene while minimizing
carbon emissions.
So, that's great. Plastic waste
is a huge issue and being able to break
it down into
um into chemicals we can use is is very
cool.
[clears throat] That's the actual
experiment there. By the way, I should
explain what these images are because
some images are correct and others are
artistic. like this one here. This is
not
um an image of a virus. This is an
artistic um representation. So a new
micros
microscopy
a new microscopy technique known as
virus view dual confocal and AFM
which combines atomic force microscopy
with fluoresence microsc microscopy. I'm
having difficulty saying microscopy
today. It's demonstrated at ETH Zurich.
This reveals a never-before-seen high
resolution view of influences invasions
of human cells.
This isn't that technique of microscopy
producing this image here. Um that's an
artistic rendition. I tried to find an
actual image. The original paper where
these results came from was locked down
so hard all of its images were were
impossible to get. So I couldn't
actually get a real image. Um,
next, researchers at the University of
Pennsylvania and Michigan
created the world's smallest fully
programmable autonomous robots measuring
just 200 by 300 by 50 micrometers or
micrometers.
And uh you can see it there on the on
the fingertip.
And [clears throat] we have studied by
the University of Birmingham finds that
electric vehicles now have an average
lifespan of 18.4 years, outlasting the
average diesel vehicle at 16.8 years and
almost matching the average petrol
vehicle at 18.7 years. So that's good to
know. The longevity of electric vehicles
is not far off that of petric petrol
vehicles because it was a bit of a worry
about the batteries.
Okay. Some advances in 3D printing. The
first 3D printed microscope is revealed
by the University of Strath Clyde. Made
in just a few hours and for a fraction
of the cost of traditional devices.
That's very cool. To be able to print
your own microscope um
means more microscopes for more people.
We love microscopy even if we can't
pronounce it. [gasps]
3D um printing. So machine learning and
3D printing are used at the University
of Toronto to design nanoarchitected
materials exhibiting the strength of
carbon steel but the lightness of
styrofoam. Again, new materials are
always exciting because they can be used
for so many well, we don't even know
what they can be used for yet.
Okay, moving on to chemistry.
Uh, these are these are cool. So,
researchers at Berkeley and Cambridge
attach copper nanoflower catalysts on
perov perovskitebased
artificial leaves. This is a lot of
science words, but I've got an
explanation afterwards. So basically um
there are perovskite based artificial
leaves uh for solardriven hydrocarbon
synthesis and the divi devices can
produce ethane and ethylene at rates
um coupling the CO2 reduction with
glycerol oxidation into value added
chem. So basically what this means is
the they've made a device that combines
a life abs a lightabsorbing leaf. So you
get sunlight shining on the leaf from a
very high efficiency solar cell. Um
that's the thing that's the perovskite.
It
um converts the solar energy um
into
um the well it takes the energy from the
perovskite
and passes it to a copper nanoflower
catalyst and that converts carbon
dioxide into useful molecules unlike
most metal catalysts which can only
convert CO2 into single carbon
molecules. So just breaking it down. Um
instead the copper flies enable the
formation of more complex hydrocarbons
which are the glycerol.
Um so complex hydrocarbons with two
carbon atoms such as um ethane and
ethylene key building blocks for liquid
fuels and chemicals and plastics. So
basically a way to break down
carbon dioxide into things liquid fuels.
We've also got another one from the
University of Cambridge
uh which is the creation of solar
powered reactor that pulls carbon
dioxide directly from the air and
converts it into sustainable fuel. So,
it's a solar powered flow reactor using
specialized filters to grab CO2 from the
air at night, kind of like a sponge. And
then when the sun comes out, sunlight
heats up the captured CO2, absorbing
infrared radiation. And a semiconductor
power absorbs the ultraviolet radiation
to start a chemical reaction, converted
that converting that CO2
um
into sustainable fuel.
I don't know what the fuel is though,
but that's cool. Absorbing CO2 in the
day and then at night, sorry, and then
using sunlight in the day. Trouble with
all of this carbon capture stuff, it
won't work at scale to actually uh
mitigate climate change.
How do
sustainable fuel is vague? It's true.
It's true. Uh, I'd have to dig deeper to
find out exactly what the sustainable
fuel is.
Uh, electricity would be good.
How do I arrange and prepare these
lessons? Well, I I kind of cheated with
this one. I literally just copied and
pasted that Wikipedia page that I uh
mentioned at the top, this one here, and
reformatted it and add images. Um and I
ch basically collected all of the
top um advances of a specific subject
together. That's it. Because I think
that's a better way of absorbing this
information is by subject area rather
than chronologically because then the
science is a bit all over the place. At
least we stay like subject dependent
here. Okay. Here's a report from
uh researchers at the University of
Adelaide showing a way to use sunlight
to dissolve PFAS plur
poly fluuroal substances which are the
forever chemicals that um cause a lot of
pollution because they stick around
forever and it can use sunlight to break
these down these PFAS's into a range of
harmless substances including including
fluoride.
Um
then
we have a few more
um which I'll just rattle through.
Yeah, I plagiarized. It's true. I'll
admit it.
[laughter]
Um but then Wikipedia is a place. It's a
it's a resource for everyone. I'm
hopefully adding a bit of value with
this with the images and context. Um,
also this isn't monetized, so
no one's making any money here.
[laughter]
Researchers develop an AI chips more
than a grain of salt.
Uh, we've got
um a cooling system for uh computer
chips reducing data center cooling
energy by 40%. We got scientists in
China doing parallel optical computing
um with 100 simultaneous wavelength
based operations. So it's basically new
kinds of um computing. This one's using
optical computing. So using lights to do
computing. Chinese researchers
have um made indiumelide semiconductors.
So instead of the normal silicon
semiconductors, this is indium
salelonide which is a new material
um trying to make faster, smaller, more
efficient electronics.
University of Florida have developed a
chip that replaces electricity with
light for key AI tasks
and a all optical chip known as light
gen featuring 2 million photonic neurons
uh presented by Chinese researchers in
journal science.
So and the interesting thing about this
is the speed and energy efficiency are
reportedly two orders of magnitude
greater than conventional electronic
chips. So a lot of work is being
um done in optical computing
which is which is cool because obviously
silicon computing creates huge amount of
um heat energy I believe optical well
this is what this report is saying is
the energy effic efficiency is two
orders of magnitude greater than
conventional electronic chips. all of
these data centers kicking out so much
um energy. It's a big problem if you
want to increase um computing power. The
trouble is is that um silicon technology
is such a mature technology, it's hard
for a new like an optical chip to match
it in terms of throughput. So I'd be
interested to see actually how powerful
these optical chips are in comparison to
traditional um semiconductor chips. Hey,
In and Out. Thanks for the another $2.
Uh, do you want to do a part two of any
of my videos? Um, not really. So, with
my videos, I try and summarize the whole
subject in one go. And um, so it it's
like an opportunity cost thing like it
would be better to spend my time on a
new subject rather than doing a part
two. Having said that, I think some of
my videos, especially the map of
computer science, it is out of date
because I made that long enough that AI
just wasn't a thing. Well, AI was very
academic back when I made it. But this
grand deployment of public AI was not a
thing then. So having a map of computer
science that doesn't contain,
you know, language models seems like a
bit of an oversight. So I definitely
have to uh
definitely have to um update that. So
many of the major advances from China.
Yeah, China um have got a huge amount of
funding for science. So it's not a
surprise that they're making a lot of
advances.
Um
so for this it only took me two days to
put this together. Um but in general
it's it's it depends on the subject
matter. Uh but it's like can [snorts] be
up to
um six months
from beginning to end for a video. Uh my
last one was a month and a half. So it's
it's it's many weeks. Anyway,
now we're on to this section which I'm
calling weird stuff.
Uh,
in February, an electronic device called
an easte was developed by Ohio State
University. It's shown to replicate the
perception of taste, which could enhance
virtual reality experiences.
I I want to try that out. That sounds
interesting. Trouble is taste. What is
it? What do they say? 70% of taste is
smell.
More in weird science. The deextinction
company Colossal Biosciences announces
the creation of a woolly mouse with
eight modified genes expressing
mammoth-like traits relevant to cold
adaption and providing a platform for
validation of genome engineering
targets. I have to say, Colossal
Biosciences, these are the people who
are trying to um bring back the woolly
mammoth.
A lot of it to me seems kind of uh
creepy. [laughter]
Uh but you can't ignore the fact that
they're doing interesting science. Um
the ethics of it though, I don't know.
So they also announced Romulus Remis and
Khesi genetically modified greywolves
which reproduce the characteristics of
the extinct direwolves.
Also
at a planetary science meeting in
Helsinki scientists from the Austrian
Academy of Scientists Sciences report
that the nearest technological
civilization in the Milky Way could be
about 33,000 light years away. Their
modeling suggests that such
civilizations would need to last for at
least 280,000 years to coincide in time
with humanity.
That's interesting.
I don't think we know anything about
aliens and alien civilizations. There
are so many confounding variables that I
think any of this is highly dubious. All
right, that was the weird section done.
Um,
let's go on to paleontology because
there was a cool thing in January. The
biggest dinosaur fossil trackway ever
found in the UK is reported at quarry in
Oxfordshire consisting of 200 huge
footprints made during the mid Jurassic.
Um, it's cool. I've been to one of
these. There's one on the south coast
which has got Diplodocus
uh footprints and it's cool to see. It's
got an adult and a juvenile walking by
the adult. And to see the footprints of
dinosaurs,
uh, is amazing. So, this one's even
bigger. So, that's cool. I wonder what
they'll do with it. Okay, onto
anthropology. So, this is really
interesting. So, this is a cave where
they found a 3D map carved into the
floor of the cave. Um, so these lines
here. here. So if I go down to the
second image.
So if you see on the left hand side
we've got lines
um which represent
waterways and then we've got hills
representing the the the hills in this
valley.
This could be the world's oldest
three-dimensional map um in the Paris
basin of France dating back 13,000
years.
So this is um cool discovery.
Okay, now let's go on to biology. We're
getting through these which is good
because medicine and climate environment
are very very big. So in biology we
first thing we've got um a previously
unknown organel described as a
hemifusome is found to exist within
human cells. So people discovering
anything new inside human inside cells
is is exciting. So this is a new organal
a map of maps. Now there's an idea.
[clears throat]
Oh, I appear to be losing my voice.
I've wanted to do a map of maps for a
long, long time. a map of uh
map of map projections maybe.
Um
scientists at Tulain University, I think
that's how you pronounce that, report
that
Cuban brown annals, a type of lizard in
New Orleans, exhibit extreme lead
tolerance, hinting at oxygen carrying
adaptations. a new research frontiers.
So basically these lizards can have
I think okay so um just to get derel
this organel
I don't think they know what it does yet
they've just discovered it so now they
need to figure out what it does
but they've discovered new structures
they're like what's that no one no one
had seen them before and this lizard it
can be absolutely full of lead normally
that kills stuff but for this lizard
It's absolutely fine.
Also here, um, [snorts] dozens of new
marine species, this is one example, are
reported to have been discovered in the
southern ocean, including the
cannivorous death ball sponge. This
isn't the death ball sponge. This is a
new kind of iridescent scale worm. Looks
prehistoric.
Okay, next up, medicine. [clears throat]
Okay, medicine's a long one. Um so many
things
have happened this year.
So um
get any questions you want now cuz um
this is going to be a long one.
[laughter]
I'll show you. [clears throat]
It's very cool. It's very cool that um
there are so many advances in medicine.
Okay, so let's just rattle through this
whistle stop tour of 2025's medicine
results. So researchers report
discovering a new class of antimmalaria
antibodies.
That's fun. Getting rid of malaria would
be fantastic. So this is a step towards
that. Scientists publish a comprehensive
map of protein locations within human
cells. Hey, I love maps. Offering
potentially new insights into how cells
respond to infections and other changing
circumstances.
Colossal Biosciences and the University
of Melbourne create the world's first
artificial womb in marsupials as part of
their project towards
thyloine deextinction. What's a
thyloine?
Oh, it's these um
these
marsupials. They're like
Australian marsupials, aren't they?
Tasmanian tiger, Tasmanian wolf,
right? Artificial womb. Colossal bio
sances. This is my thing. They're kind
of crazy,
but are they good or are they bad? Or
maybe they're somewhere in the middle.
Who knows? A study of adults with
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
ADHD finds that the condition may reduce
life expectancy by 4.5 to 9 years for
men and 6.5 to 11 years for women.
A new blood test able to detect early
stage pancreatic cancer with 85%
accuracy is developed by Oregon Health
and Science University.
[clears throat and cough] Excuse me.
That's cool. The blood tests for cancers
of are getting much better. Um, so
that's good. A new diagnostic test to
catch that early. First image of two
pink one proteins attached to the
membrane of mitochondrian is oba
obtained via cryo electron microscopy a
potential breakthrough in developing
treatments for Parkinson's disease.
Uh, this is the world's smallest
pacemaker. So the the the new pacemaker
is the one on the far right. So the two
on the left, so the left and middle are
older versions or existing versions of
pacemakers.
So the
small one is a able to fit inside the
tip of a syringe and be non-invasively
injected into the body.
It was demonstrated by scientists at
Northwestern University and the device
measures just 3.5 millimeters in length
designed for temporary use and could be
made to be biodegradable within a set
number of days depending on the patients
need.
What's my honest view on bringing these
ex extinct species back?
Um, [clears throat]
I don't see what the argument for it is.
So, I would disagree with it.
I think it's sad that species go
extinct,
but I would concentrate
efforts on
protecting the species we've got on
Earth now rather than trying to bring
back species that are already ex
extinct. It's one of these things where,
you know, you bring back a woolly mouth.
A mouse [snorts]
woolly [laughter] mouth. I'm having a
woolly mouth. um you try and bring back
a woolly mammoth and in the time you did
that
100,000
ex like existing species have gone
extinct. So it just seems a bit
backwards
message to request to please do such se
sessions every weekend.
Yeah, the argument is that it is cool.
Well, that's the thing. Um,
it doesn't necessarily need to be true
that if you're trying to make trying to
de-extinct species, you can't also try
and protect existing species. So, that's
a fair argument for doing it. Um,
and doing it because it's cool. I'm sure
they're learning a lot about um
bioengineering
and um
um
and and genomics along the way. So, I'm
sure they're learning lots of useful
stuff.
Okay. Scientists at UC Berkeley use
lasers to stimulate human retinas to see
an extremely saturated blue green
imaginary color dubbed olo. I want to
see a new color. First successful human
bladder transplant is performed at
Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center. A
bladder transplant. First successful
human bladder transplant. Oh, sorry. I'm
going off the top of the screen. Um,
a study by University in Sweden finds
that a lack of sleep can increase the
risk of cardiovascular diseases.
Researchers found that just three nights
of restricted sleep, around four hours a
night, triggered changes in the blood
linked to higher risk of heart disease.
Good to know. Get more sleep. Genes
linked to obsessivempulsive disorder are
discovered for the first time. Study
involving more than 2 million people
identifies 250 genes linked to the
condition. It's interesting.
World's first gonorrhea vaccine is
launched by the NHS in England with an
efficacy of 30 to 40%.
A major clinical trial published in the
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition
reveals that vitamin D supplements can
reduce biological aging, preserving
telomeres and potentially adding three
years to lifespan. Now, I know vitamin D
is good for us. I had no idea that it
could reduce biological aging,
preserving telomeres.
Whoops. Um, intestine mice, a
combination of rapamy
and
tren tmetanib
is found to extend lifespan by 30% and
works better than either of the drugs
alone. So concoction of drugs
increases the lifespan of mice by 30%.
So yeah,
looks like if you want to live forever,
well, I'm not going to make any medical
claims here in mice. That happened in
mice and uh doesn't necessarily mean
it's going to happen in humans.
Okay, this is cool. The first delivery
of an mRNA into white blood cells hiding
HIV is demonstrating using specifically
formulated nanoparticles known as LNPX.
The M mRNA instructs the cells to reveal
the hidden virus. So this is potentially
huge.
HIV treatment has been so difficult
because the h because the virus hides
inside the immune cells inside the white
blood cells. So a technique to instruct
those cells to reveal the hidden virus
means that it can it's it's it's
potentially how you can then treat it.
Um so this is a very very exciting
advance in the treating of HIV.
Also this is also very really cool. All
of this medicine stuff is amazing.
Engineers at Columbia University create
a capsid
[snorts] a tumor homing salmonella to
smuggle
an enolitic
virus into cancers. So basically
engineered salmonella virus.
No salmonella is a bacterium isn't it?
So an engineered salmonella bacteria
which contains a virus.
Um
this evades antibodies and releases the
virus inside the tumor cells. And it's
got a built-in safety switch where the
the spread
of this um this virus is limited to the
tumors. So this is this is mad. So
you've got a bacteria
delivering a virus
to a tumor
and then
it releases the antibodies that kill off
the tumor
and limits itself to that tumor.
Isn't that cool?
So that's that's this has been
demonstrated
again another another advance in in
treating cancer which is just amazing.
Researchers at the Southern Australian
Health and Medical Research Institute
developed nanoparticles that both detect
and shrink arterial plaque offering a
new theronostic approach to treating
heart disease. So arterial plaque is a
big problem with the occlusion of
arteries in the heart and leads to um
reduce blood supply to the heart and can
lead to heart attacks. And so
nanop particles that both detect and
shrink arterial plaque it's cool. I
don't I've never heard of therronostic
approach. I don't know what that means.
Enemy of my enemy is my friend moment.
[laughter] Yeah.
Um,
experts at Leipzig University identify
receptor GPR133 which helps bones stay
strong. Stimulating this receptor with a
new compound called AP503 boosted bone
strength in mice even reversing
osteoporosis like conditions. So again
in mice but advances in potentially a
treatment for osteoporosis.
Researchers at UC Berkeley mapped the
brain circuits that control growth
hormone released during sleep,
uncovering a feedback system where sleep
fuels hormone release and the hormone
regulates wakefulness.
This discovery may explain links between
poor sleep, obesity, diabetes, and
cognitive decline while opening new
paths for treating sleep and metabolic
disorders.
Excuse me. Um,
basically
sleep is the best thing and we need to
make sure
we get as much as possible is what
everyone's discovering.
Studying H Highleberg and there are some
guys researching something similar just
with engineered molecules instead of
bacteria. That's very cool. Lots of
exciting news for all the mice out
there. Unfortunately,
the mice used in these experiments
uh may not have survived.
A break oops, sorry. Uh breakthrough in
treating Huntington's disease is
reported by UK doctors with a new gene
therapy able to slow its progression by
75%.
I saw this when it came out. Um gene
therapy for Huntington's disease. This
is this is a big breakthrough. 75%
um rate of progression going down by 75%
is um is a huge result.
Scientists at the University of British
Columbia and Avivo Biomedical performed
the first human test of an enzyme
treatment that converts a donor kidney
into a universal blood type, making a
major step towards universally
compatible organ transplants.
Um,
now we've got some crisper. So, crisper
was
I [snorts] remember maybe 10 years ago
it was the big thing uh when it had been
discovered the ability to use a virus to
edit out um
genetic code in like just about
anywhere. And now we've got some results
from crisper phase one. So first inhuman
trial a crisper gene therapy targeting
GPTL3
is found to be safe and able to reduce
LDL cholesterol by nearly 50% while
triglycerides are reduced by 55%. So
basically this is a crisper based gene
therapy
um to to target cholesterol. So if
you've got high cholesterol,
this in a human trial, not not mice,
this is humans, was shown to reduce
cholesterol by 50% and triglycerides by
55%. So this is very cool. Crisper,
you can reverse crisper to reverse
aging.
Um,
is it true that prisoners are also used
as guinea pigs or is it just a movie
claim? Yeah, that's definitely a movie
claim. No. No, no one's using prisoners
for
for for science experiments.
Will we find the cure for cancer during
this decade? The trouble with the
trouble with cancer is
it's not it's not a disease like a viral
disease or um
yeah, it's not an infection. It's a it's
a genetic thing and so there's not one
kind of cancer. So
any so any
disruption is my understanding anyway.
So you've got a cell and it's got um
it's got genes that code how the cell
replicates itself and errors in that
genetic code
that um disrupt how the cancer how cells
replicate themselves can create a
cancer. That means there's many many
many different ways. So any of the cell
direct so we've got many different types
of cells in our body. Any one of those
going wrong causes the specific cancer
in that area.
Um, and so the d the the the the realm
of cancers is so huge that I'm not sure
there can be a cure for cancer because
if you cure
uh a bunch of cancers, there's always
still some other cancer that that might
get you later on in life. Cancer is kind
of um
um an issue. Um, it's kind of one of the
biggest limit, you know, that you've got
all of these tech billionaires who are
trying to live forever and so they're
doing all of these sort of longevity
techniques to try and live forever. The
trouble is is that above 110,
you've just got a wall of cancer waiting
for you where your cells processes just
break down due to uh replicating
themselves so many times. So, I'm not
sure it's
um sorry, I'm just reading the comments.
I don't think it's um as simple as as a
cure for say um a viral disease.
Actually, a viral disease isn't a good
example because we don't have cures for
most viral diseases.
Um
yeah, here we go. Food and cheese.
Cancer is so hetro hetrogenous
heterogeneous that a single tumor itself
will have different clones of a of
cancer in it. Yeah, exactly.
Um
yeah, I remember listening to a podcast
and they were basically saying what is
the why can't we live forever? And um uh
uh an expert in cell biology was
basically saying that the reason we
can't live forever is that evolution
has pushed cancers further and further
away further later and later in life.
And so we've adapted to um survive for a
long time, but those cancers are still
there. and they're going to hit us.
Um,
Mr. Hi, love your videos. Just wanted to
know if the stream will be member only
after it ends. No, this video will just
be on my channel after it ends.
Apart from my academic specialtity,
which other domain of science interests
you answer on
everything? Sorry, that's not a fun
response. Um, but the reason why I
really enjoy doing my YouTube channel is
that I basically get to pick a new
subject that I don't know a lot about,
like philosophy, [snorts] and then go
deep research or one which I did
recently, fungi, get to do a load of
research into that and then make a video
about it. Anyway, let's move on.
Uh researchers at Cristiana Care's gene
editing institute report that disabling
their nrf2 gene with crisper can reverse
chemotherapy resistance in lung cancer
restoring drug sensitivity. Uh this
that's this image here um
re restoring drug sensitivity and
slowing tumor growth. This method shows
consistent benefits across cell studies
and animal models suggesting wider
potential for treating other NRF2 driven
resistant tumors. Brilliant. The ability
to um treat uh resistance chemotherapy
resistant tumors uh using crisper.
We've also had the first complete
synthesis of verticillin a reported by
chemist MIT. The fungal compound
discovered more than 50 years ago has
long been viewed as a promising
anti-cancer agent, particularly for
treating aggressive brain tumors.
That's cool. Um, researchers at the
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology report that a gut bacterium
isolated from amphibians and reptiles
can completely eliminate coloerectyl
tumors in mice after a single
intravenous dose. The bacterium
elwingella
e-wingella americanana selectively
accumulates in tumor tissue combining
direct cancer cell killing with immune
activation and outperforming standard
chemotherapy and immunotherapy in
pre-clinical tests. So that's in mice
but that sounds almost too good to be
true
but very cool.
Um,
Bible says 120 is the age limit. See if
we can break it sometime. People are
getting close. Do you think gene editing
is ethical?
Um,
it's one of these things that
it can be used. It's a technology.
Technologies are morally agnostic. It
depends on how they're used. How does
your preparation start when you start a
subject from scratch? Can you bake down
the initials? Literally reading a book.
Books are great.
I find books are the best way of doing
research um rather than the internet
because
they've been edited
and a lot of work has been put into
making a book good. So there's a lot of
like very short introduction to certain
subjects. Those are good. Um and also
honestly Wikipedia is amazing.
The amount of curation done by by
experts who really care about their
subject mean that Wikipedia I think is
actually one of the best sources of
information we've got.
Can you discuss the role of inflammation
causing cancer and other illnesses?
Absolutely. not my domain of expertise.
Uh I've heard about it. Um inflammation
generally is my understanding of it at
least is that when you've got
inflammation, you've got um [snorts]
cells doing a lot of dying and
regrowing. And so if you've got a lot of
cell replication,
it increases the chance of something
going wrong in that replication. That's
my very very simple understanding of
inflammation causing cancer.
um
top three of my non-fiction books list
right now. Um it depends what you're
into. Um
there's really I I almost want to say
authors instead of
um books. So I Jim Al anything physics
based Jim Alkalle's a fantastic writer.
Um I'll have a think about I'll have a
think about any others. Um interestingly
I from my research of the um map of
fungi there was this
book by Merlin Sheldrake which
um is it the secret life of fungi? It
had a lot of errors in it. Um so it's a
it's a good book. It's interesting, but
unfortunately
when I did my fact checking for the map
of fungi, I found quite a few things
wrong. Right, we're on to climate now.
So, the bad news, I'm giving you that
first
and then we have got some good news at
the end.
So,
Leonard Suskin, I haven't actually read
any of his.
Okay, let's get into climate. So, the
European Council, the European
Capernacus Climate Change Service
reports that 2024 was the world's
hottest year on record and the first
calendar year to pass the symbolic
threshold of 1.5 degrees C um of global
warming. So,
one thing to bear in mind with this um
hottest years on record, we've been
we've been getting them fairly
consistently.
Uh the 1.5 degree doesn't mean that on
average we've passed the 1.5 degree.
Last year 2024 could have been an
outlier. In fact, probably was. So we
have to wait a bit longer to see where
the the the average actually is.
Um
it's just
do this.
Um,
the air monitoring station at the Muna
Lower Mauna Lower Observatory in Hawaii
reports atmospheric concentration of CO2
is now at 427 ppm, more than 50% higher
than the pre-industrial level. So, also
new highest record of um CO2 measured.
A new record for
global sea ice, record low global sea
ice extent is reported, dipping below
the previous lows that incurred in early
2023.
So these are the big signs of climate
change. They're all going up. Study
finds that rising sea levels could
threaten the iconic Maui statues of
Easter Island by the year 2080.
Study led by the International Institute
for Applied Systems Analysis was
published in Nature finds that safe and
practical underground carbon storage
could reduce global warming by only 0.7
degrees, nearly 10 times less than
previous estimates. The research
establishes a prudent global storage
limit of about 1,460 gigatons of CO2,
highlighting the resources scarcity and
the need for careful management.
Interesting. So carbon storage
isn't as effective as previously
thought.
Um
yeah, no props. [laughter]
We have to focus on carbon emissions.
any kind of storage or um
carbon capture
the studies show is is
not sufficient
to mitigate against climate change. So
we have to focus on carbon emissions and
reducing those. This is what this is all
saying. me. Scientists from the
Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute
report that seasonal winds, which
normally bring nutrient-rich water to
Panama's coast, have stalled, likely as
a result of climate change with negative
impacts on marine life. So, that's one
of these tipping I don't not sure it's a
tipping point, but it's one of these
signs that um [clears throat and cough]
the the uh environmental systems are
being disrupted. um big worry for us
here in the UK as well. If the um if the
Gulf Stream gets disrupted because of
some climate tipping point, then it will
plunge the UK into like a really really
really Siberian cold um weather.
Okay, [clears throat]
let's carry on. International team of 42
scientists publishes a critical
assessment in frontiers of science.
Finding five prominent geoengineering
proposals such as pumping seawater onto
Arctic ice, deploying reflective glass
beads, building underwater curtains,
injecting aerosols, and fertilizing
oceans. All to be technically
unfeasible, unscalable, and
environmentally harmful. And caution
that they distract from vital emission
reduction efforts. Yeah, exactly.
we have to reduce emissions. Any kind of
geoengineering
is not is
nothing. There's no indications that
they're going to actually work and they
might be actively damaging. So,
a study by the Potam Institute for
Climate Impact Research in Germany finds
that Earth has now exceeded a critical
threshold for ocean acidification,
marking the seventh of nine planetary
boundaries to be breached.
Hector glacia in Antarctica is reported
to have undergone the fastest retreat of
any glacia in modern history with nearly
50% disintegrating in just two months.
An international team led by ETHZurich
reports the first global timeline for
glacia disappearance
introducing the concept of ple peak
glacia extinction and projecting that
under current warming trends the Alps
could lose nearly all but a few dozen
glacias. I keep on saying glacia and
glacia different by 2100 with annual
glacia losses peaking mid-century. How
do you say glacia? Is it Glacia or
Glacia?
Hey, we're nearly at the end. After
this, we've got um environment, AI, and
maths.
And I'll skip over AI. That'll be quick.
Um because mostly it's it's just lots of
releases.
Okay. Um so that was the negative news.
In positive news, renewable energy
overtook coal as the world's largest
source of electricity, largely due to 20
African countries importing a record
number of solar panels from China.
China's um
production of solar panels is ramping up
really, really quickly. Well, ramping
up, it's it's just it's already it's
already ramped. They're building new
ramps.
Um, the UK saw wind power covering about
onethird of demand and cold practically
disappear as a power source. That's
that's very cool. You should bear in
mind that this is all electricity
generation which is just one of the
emitters. So it doesn't include
um
all all of aviation airplanes emitting
um transport emitting
carbon. So electricity generation is
just one part of of carbon emissions um
creating fertilizer all of those
industry they're they're all different
em emitters. Um but in terms of the
generation of electricity which is a
good chunk um things are things are
looking good. Overall renewable power
capacity is on track to double by 2030
globally. And a study by the center of
research on energy and clean air finds
that China's carbon emissions declined
in the 12 months up to May in 2025 even
as demand for new power generation grew
rapidly marking potential milestone in
addressing climate change. Yeah, China
are making um great advances in in clean
energy.
Okay, now on to environment which is
related to climate um for sure. Again,
I'm stacking the bad news up front and
then we've got the good news at the end.
So coral bleaching on the southern Great
Barrier Reef in early 2024 is reported
to have struck 80% of colonies with some
coral coral genera such as Acropora
experiencing 95% mortality rate. I mean
this is just
an absolute massacre.
More than a third 34% of the Arctic
boreal zone is now reported to be a
source of carbon emissions rather than a
carbon sink. a figure that rises to 40%
when including emissions from fires
uh because it's warming up. A study in
science finds that butterfly populations
in the US declined by 22% between 2000
and 2020 with 13 times as many species
decreasing as increasing raising
concerns about future biodiversity loss.
Um [clears throat]
study in the journal PNAS finds that
microplastic pollution reduces
photosynthesis in plants and algae by up
to 12% leading to an estimated annual
food losses of a few hundred million
tons of crops and up to 24 million tons
of seafood. Without action to reduce
plastic waste, this could lead to
another 400 million people at risk of
starvation within two decades. So crop
yields down because of plastic
pollution.
A review by Murdoch University in
Australia finds that agricultural soils
now hold around 23 times more
microplastics than the oceans.
Again, [laughter]
uh we're eating microplastics. Uh we
can't even avoid it in in our
vegetables.
Now onto the good news. High Seas Treaty
pledges to put 30% of international
waters into marine protected areas. This
is fantastic because I think less than
1% are protected. So in international
waters um it's hard to manage those
because no one's in control. So this is
um uh global efforts to protect
international waters
which is a fantastic result. um UN
report that global deforestation rates
were 38% lower in the last 10 years of
2015 to 2025. So in the last 10 years
compared to 1990 to 2000 with more than
half of forest now covered by long-term
manage management plans which is good
deforestation's lower but still globally
each year a large area is still being
cleared roughly the size of the US state
of Nevada which is mindboggling.
the ozone layer is healing. Well, that's
that's a good example of us humans
identifying a problem and having a
global agreement to try and fix it.
We can do that as well with carbon. It's
a lot more difficult because we've got a
lot of very um powerful
companies who have got a vested interest
in um in creating carbon. [laughter]
Whereas with CO2s, you could you could
replace the chemicals um with CO2s with
uh with the um sorry I've been on stream
for a long time. uh with the ozone
layer, the CFC's that were destroying
the ozone layer could be replaced by
other. So there was an alternative with
carbon. If you're burning stuff, there's
no way of burning stuff um that doesn't
create carbon.
So that's the problem.
Colombia became the first country to
declare its entire Amazon region off
limits to large-scale mining.
Democratic Republic of Congo are
creating a massive protected forest
reserve the size of France. Mexico,
Guatemala biz created the great May and
forest bioultural corridor, the second
biggest in Latin America. So we've had
multiple efforts to protect wildlands um
for
for biodiversity
and um animals
in India. the Asiatic line and tiger
populations are increasing and now
there's more than 3,600 tigers which
have doubled in the numbers have doubled
in just over a decade. So this is a real
success story as well as green turtles
which have been re rescued from the
brink of extinction and also salmon have
returned to their traditional spawning
grounds after the historic removal of
four dams in California's Calm River. So
that's cool that the salmon remember to
go to uh that river to their traditional
spawning grounds after what must have
been decades of the dams existing
in the end. Please suggest some good
reads. Yeah, I'll see if I I've got a
bookshelf over there. I could probably
just grab a few off there.
Okay, [snorts] on to AI. So, [laughter]
um, this is dominated by a bunch of
releases.
Okay, I won't skip AI. Um,
so a lot of this, uh, the reason I was
going to skip it is because it's people
just releasing new AI models. So,
Microsoft releases matter gener
generative AI tool for materials design.
This one's actually cool because it's
targeted at generating new materials
rather than replacing artists. Um, so
that that is actually useful. I like
that one. [snorts] OpenAI announces GPT
4.5 largest and most advanced AI model
to date. And in March, it was reported
to have passed the touring test. Um so a
quote from the study was it was judged
to be hu it was judged by the human test
subjects
uh GPT 4.5 was judged to be human 73% of
the time. Does that count as passing the
Turing test? I'm not sure.
Open AAI announces the launch of two new
AI models 03 and 04 mini. Uh Google
DeepMine amount announces V3
state-of-the-art video generation model
also boosts the performance of Gemini
2.5 Pro. It's flagship flagship AI
model. The trouble with a lot of these
um advances
is there's no science substance behind
the announcements. It's just it's new
and better. Um there's a couple at the
end which I prefer.
Oh, this is interesting.
Um,
basically
some models of generative AI are shown
to require the equivalent of running a
microwave oven for an hour to produce 5
seconds of video.
So they're very very energy intensive.
OpenAI announces chat GPT agent a
toolbox of agent skills complete task
for you. Do I I just don't use AI at
all. Am I missing out on something? Like
has anyone used like chat GPT agent for
anything useful?
I literally I've tried to use it.
Um but for what I'm doing, AI doesn't do
a good job.
I'm sure it can do some things well, but
for research it's got errors. for
drawing it creates what it can create,
not what not the style that I create.
Um,
so
anyway,
GPT5 is released
featuring PhD level intelligence. I
mean, maybe I'm just not using GPT5.
Google releases Gemini 3.
So
that's in Google search most intelligent
model. I have actually found
here's the thing with AI.
When I'm searching for stuff, the AI
summaries
tend to give me the information
that I would need to go to a website to
see. [snorts]
Um, and the trouble is the internet is
basically not usable anymore because if
you go to a website, you've got like 10
popups before you can actually access
the information.
So,
what AI is doing is it's saving me from
having to go to a website and to click
on the cookies and um notification popup
and all the popups that just barrage you
as soon as you open a website.
But what they're doing is they're
basically completely stealing the
traffic from those websites. So I don't
see how any website makes any money
anymore because no one wants to go to
them because of all the pop-ups. And
anyway, AI can just summarize all the
information for you in search.
So we're all just just the internet is
goo. It just the Google company is the
internet now.
>> [clears throat]
>> Okay, let's move on.
Gemini 3. Um, chat GPT there. So, this
is interesting. Chat GPT version 5.2
solves an original open math problem,
learning curve monoticity
for MLE in Gaussian settings with a
novel approach. So, that's cool. The
fact that an AI model can solve an open
maths problem, that's interesting.
And finally, uh, a new study suggests
that AI systems may have a carbon
footprint equivalent to that of New York
in 2025, while their water footprint
could be in the range of the global
annual consumption of bottled water.
Wow.
Hungry boys.
Let's have a look. Genius.
Okay, let's move on to the last section,
mathematics. So, in this one, I'm going
to read it. I don't fully understand it,
but there's a great link at the bottom
to a video that will explain these
things better than me.
So
um some researchers at the University of
Vienna describe a convex polyhedrron
without rupert's property which they
call a noeredron
mathematics is fun because
you read the words and no one
understands anything. Hilbert's sixth
problem solved in a Langbark achievement
showing the Boltzman laws of fluid
dynamics emerged from Newton's motions
of atoms. I do sort of understand this
one. So um
basically the laws of thermodynamics in
physics are at the large scale if you're
looking at a gas you use the Boltzman
laws
um pressure temperature
um volume those those laws and those are
averages of what's actually going on
which is the motion of actual atoms but
you can't you can't calculate every
single atom. So mathematicians have
proved that one comes from the other
which as a physicist you just take for
granted but mathematicians
they love being pedantic they love being
deep they're very detailed. New proof in
hyperbolic surfaces shows that most of
them have an important geometric
property a spectral gap of a quarter
meaning they're as connected as
mathematically possible. Hyperbolic
surfaces are a surface where um which is
saddle-shaped
where parallel lines always diverge.
Um again this video
here this quantum maths video that's
amazing. So quant did a physics advances
of 2025 and maths advance of 2025. BBC
article is on um the environment. Um
just to do the last one in the 3D Kayaka
conjecture, mathematicians have shown
that every Kayaka set in three spatial
dimensions must also have fractional
dimension three.
Um, I'm not an expert in mathematics,
but like I said, go watch that quant
maths video and that explains all of
these maths advances really well. Okay,
that's the end.
Uh, let me just zoom all the way back.
Let's Yeah, zoom all the way. So, this
is everything that we've gone through.
Thanks for joining in. Um, before I go,
I will go and look at my shelf for some
good science reads.
Um, but that's all of Well, that's
actually a shortened list of all the
science advantage advances of 2025. I'm
slowly losing my ability to form
coherent sentences. Um,
but thanks for joining. Let me just get
you some um books off the shelf. Well,
thanks for being here.
Hello, I'm back.
Yeah, this was pretty easy to put
together. Like I said, a couple of days
of putting it together. Uh, let me go
here. Um, [snorts]
so investment of time wasn't huge and it
was nice for me just to look through all
of the science of the year because
there's a bunch of stuff that um I
missed. So I'd like to do this again
next year. I think it'd be quite a good
uh New Year's Eve Eve tradition.
[laughter]
And um now that I've got this whole
green screen setup thing, uh I can do
all sorts. Okay. So, here are some
books.
I Wow, that doesn't work. [laughter]
Hold on.
Hold on. Hold on a second. Can I
Let's just turn that off. There we go.
So, um, this is, uh, DK book, Secret
World of Plants, and I used this to
research the map of plants when I did
it. Um, it's a brilliant reference book
for plant life. I'd recommend that one.
Um, for this is a friend of mine, Simon
Clark, also a YouTuber. You should
definitely check out his YouTube channel
if you want to learn more about climate
change and keep up to date with the
latest on climate. He's I think in my
opinion the best um science communicator
on the climate on YouTube and he wrote
this book which is about the atmosphere
and it's an amazing read. Really enjoy
this. Highly recommended. Um I used this
book to research um fungi but actually
the best book
best book was this book. So this is this
is nicely written. This is a very um
it's Merlin Sheldrake Entangled Life.
It's about fungi. It's quite a romantic
story about the science of um fungi.
Unfortunately, it does contain some
errors in it. Um
but if you're interested, I think he's a
he's a great writer. So it's that's um
it's a fun read.
Um, but this is this is a book made by
um Q. And
this is more of like a coffee table type
book. It's massive, but the information
in here, if you want like a a really
nice overview, I mean, they really know
their fungy in Q. So, if you want a good
overview, this is this is an amazing
book. Um,
we've also got this is what I was
talking about with a very short
introduction book. If I want to do
research on a subject, these books, so
this is by Oxford University Press
and for my kinds of videos, if I want to
research a whole subject, oh, I can turn
my green screen back on again. Hold on.
Uh,
Sony, there we go.
Pow. There we go. I'm in space again.
Um, these books are great if you want to
have an overview of a subject. They're
written by a whole whole range of
different, they're all written by
academics. Uh, and so the quality of
them, the writing does vary. Um, some
academics are better at writing for the
general public than others, but in
general, these are really well edited
and they're just a nice little size as
well. So, philosophy of science in a
book, this is just one example. They've
got them on everything and outside of
sciences too. Um
they've got any academic discipline. So
they go humanities as well. And then uh
uh another book, this isn't science,
it's kind of social science maybe, but I
really really enjoyed this book. It's
the status game by Will Store. He writes
um a lot of of sort of non-fiction. Um,
and
this is kind of like I guess a sociology
book and the central
um argument is we're all playing a
status game and that explains a lot of
the behaviors of humans. So that gave me
a new way of looking at human behavior.
Again, I think with this it's what it's
um he he isn't a scientist. he's I guess
a journalist and and um who writes
non-fiction. So I think the trouble is
sometimes with books they have the issue
where um they'll take scientific results
from psychology and sociology and run
with them maybe make make um conclusions
from the results of those that maybe are
a little too
they jump a bit too far. Um so you have
to keep your critical hat on. But
despite all of that, I don't actually
think this is a bad example of that. But
there were some times when I was just
had to keep my crit critical hat on. But
the the points made are a real thinker.
So status game by Wilto. And then also
I've got a bunch of books which I don't
have with me, but Jim Alcali has written
one with John Joe McFaden which is um on
quantum biology. That's a really good
book about quantum biology. So, look up
um Jim Alkalini, anything he's written
basically. All right. Well, thank you
for all your nice comments. Um
and thanks for thanks for coming along
and uh
I'll see you
next year. No, I'll see you soon. I've
got a video um I've got lots of plans
for new videos this year. So,
okay. I should say bye.